feat: Support lazy load and pagination for API (#1009)
aws-amplify/amplify-ios: AmplifyPlugins/API/AWSAPICategoryPlugin/AWSAPIPlugin.md

## Model-based GraphQL API queries

APIPlugin at its core provides functionality to make requests to a GraphQL service. There are key developer use cases that can be achieved when using Amplify's `Model` types generated from Amplify CLI after provisioning a GraphQL AppSync service through the `amplify add api` command . The usability of the API (`Amplify.API.query`, `Amplify.API.mutate`, and `Amplify.API.subscribe`) is coupled with the `GraphQLRequest` builders (`.get`, `.create`, etc) to provide a simple way to perform operations on their model or to retrieve instances of the model. The following goes over the algorithms used to perform successful operations for retrieving a model, a model with associations, and a list of models.

1. As a developer, I want to retrieve a simple model object. 
```swift
Amplify.API.query(.get(SimpleModel.self, byId: id)

// A Simple Model
struct SimpleModel: Model {
  let id: String
}

> ```

Author: thanks, i've applied this else where

- `AWSGraphQLOperation` will serializes the request and perform the network call to the AppSync service.
- Upon getting a successful response from the service, the data portion of the response which represents the model instance, is extracted by `GraphQLResponseDecoder`.
- The model instance data is decoded to the response type. As an end result, the instance of the model is returned.

2. As a developer, I want to retrieve a list of simple model objects.
```swift
Amplify.API.query(.paginatedList(SimpleModel.self)
```
- `.paginatedList(SimpleModel.self)` will create a `GraphQLRequest` with selection set containing "items" and "nextToken", response type `List<SimpleModel>`, and variables containing the `limit` of 1000.
- `GraphQLResponseDecoder` will detect that the response type is a `List` by checking against `ModelListMarker`, before encapsulating the original request and response using an `AppSyncListPayload`, and decoding the `AppSyncListPayload` to the list type.

> - `List`'s custom decoder will use the `ModelListDecoderRegistry` to find a registered decoder and attempt to decode the response to retrieve an `ModelListProvider`.

Author: missed replying to this comment, but i have tried to reword the entire section here, like so:

- `GraphQLResponseDecoder` checks if the response type conforms to `ModelListMarker`. If so, it encapsulates the original request and response using an `AppSyncListPayload`, and decodes the `AppSyncListPayload` to the `List` type.
- `List`'s custom decoder logic will detect the `AppSyncListPayload` by first finding registered decoders in the `ModelListDecoderRegistry`. A registered decoder is used to decode the response into a `ModelListProvider` before instantiating the list instance.
- The `AppSyncListDecoder` is returned from the `ModelListDecoderRegistry`. At config time, the `AWSAPIPlugin` registers `AppSyncListDecoder` with `ModelListDecoderRegistry` to provide runtime decoding functionality. 
- `AppSyncListDecoder` checks that the data can be successfully decoded to an `AppSyncListPayload`, extracts the original request variables and response, vends a `AppSyncListProvider`, and instanatites a `List` with the list provider.

struct Post: Model {
   let id: String
   let comments: List<Comment>?
}
// The `Comment` belongs to a `Post.
struct Comment: Model {
   let id: String
   let post: Post?
}
```
- The selection set can contain multiple levels of data (the first level being the post, and second level being the list of comments), however `get(Post.self, byId: id)` controls this and only creates a selection set containng the first level to be retrieved. This provides a scalable approach to retrieve models with an "not loaded" association, and allow the developer to lazy load the assocations later.
- `GraphQLResponseDecoder` will decode the "post" response post data to a `JSONValue` object as an intermediate step to allow modifications to the data.
- The object is analyzed according to the model schema, association data (post.id and "post" field name) is stored at "comments" by creating and storing `AppSyncModelMetadata` at the "comments" key.
- The object is then serialized and then decoded to the post instance. The `Post` decoder will instantiate the fields as normally while the "comments" field will be decoded by the `List<Comment>` that delegates its logic to the `AppSyncModelListDecoder`. 

> - `AppSyncListDecoder` checks that the data can be successfully decoded to an `AppSyncModelMetadata` and stores this information in an `AppSyncListProvider` when instantiating a "not loaded" list with association data.

Author: woops, yes, `AppSyncModelListDecoder ` is a type and should be `AppSyncListDecoder` at line 54 above this line

> The developer has the post instance and can lazy load the comments upon accessing it.

Author: added the `fetch` api call example below this line

```swift
foreach comment in post.comments {
   /// comments is loaded before the first element is returned.
}
```

> - The comments are implicitly loaded upon access by taking the association data and performing a query to get the list of comments by its post id. Storing the result in the list object, and returning that to the caller that is performing the access.

Author: it's was decoded from one of the types, in this case `AppSyncModelMetadata`, before making the list provider, so at this point of the flow it is an `AppSyncListProvider` that is holding the association data

The implicit load is the same as performing an explicit call to retrieve a list of models, given a limit and condition.
```swift
Amplify.API.query(.paginatedList(Comment.self, limit: 100, where: Comment.keys.post == post.id))
```

4. As a developer, I can customize my request to retrieve multiple levels of data at once
```swift
let document = """
  query getBlog($id: ID!) {
    getBlog(id: $id) {
      id
      post {
        items {
          id
          comments {
            items {
              id
            }
            nextToken
          }
        }
        nextToken
      }
    }
  }
  """
```
- `GraphQLResponseDecoder` will skip argumenting the response data at "post" and "comments" with association data since the response data already contains the payload to be decoded to the list.
- `AppSyncListDecoder` checks that the data can be successfully decoded to `AppSyncListResponse` and instantaites a loaded list of post and list of comments respectively in the chain of decoders. 

> This advanced use case is not without caveats on integrity of the subsequent APIs calls performed from the list object. For example, `hasNextPage` relies on the selection set to contain `nextToken`, so if this is excluded from the selection set, then `hasNextPage` will always return false. `getNextPage` does not retrieve the next page according to the associated parent since association data was never added to the list provider. By providing this successful decoding flow `AppSyncListResponse`, the data represents more of a snapshot, and assumes that the developer understand what they are trying to achieve with the customization. Alternatively, developers can go to the full extent of modifying the response type as well to `AppSyncListResponse` to decode exactly what the AppSync service returns in the response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is an advanced use case, and has some caveats regarding the subsequent API calls performed from the `List`:
- `hasNextPage()` relies on the selection set to contain `nextToken`, so if this is excluded from the selection set, then `hasNextPage()` will always return `false`.
- `getNextPage(completion:)` does not retrieve the next page according to the associated parent since association data was never added to the `List` provider.

In this flow the returned data represents more of a snapshot, and assumes that the developer understands what they are trying to achieve with the customization.

Alternately, developers can go to the full extent of modifying the response type as well to `AppSyncListResponse` to control exactly what the AppSync service returns in the response.
```

## Model-based GraphQL API queries

> APIPlugin at its core provides functionality to make requests to a GraphQL service. There are key developer use cases that can be achieved when using Amplify's `Model` types generated from Amplify CLI after provisioning a GraphQL AppSync service through the `amplify add api` command. Use-case centric APIs (`Amplify.API.query`, `Amplify.API.mutate`, and `Amplify.API.subscribe`), coupled with the `GraphQLRequest` builders (`.get`, `.create`, etc), to provide a simple way to perform operations on a model or to retrieve instances of the model. The following goes over the algorithms used to perform successful operations for retrieving a model, a model with associations, and a list of models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
APIPlugin at its core provides functionality to make requests to a GraphQL service. There are key developer use cases that can be achieved when using Amplify's `Model` types generated from Amplify CLI after provisioning a GraphQL AppSync service through the `amplify add api` command. Use-case centric APIs (`Amplify.API.query`, `Amplify.API.mutate`, and `Amplify.API.subscribe`), coupled with the `GraphQLRequest` builders (`.get`, `.create`, etc), provide a simple way to perform operations on a model or to retrieve instances of the model. The following goes over the algorithms used to perform successful operations for retrieving a model, a model with associations, and a list of models.
```

1. As a developer, I want to retrieve a simple model object. 

**GraphQL Model**

```graphql
type SimpleModel @model {
  id: ID
}
```

**Swift code generated by Amplify**

```swift
struct SimpleModel: Model {
  let id: String
}
```

**App code**

```swift
Amplify.API.query(request: .get(SimpleModel.self, byId: id))
```
- A `GraphQLRequest` is created from `.get(SimpleModel.self, byId: id)` containing the request payload such as the document, variables, and `SimpleModel` response type. 

> **GraphQL document**

Reviewer: "GraphQL document generated by ..." to make it clear what's doing the work

}

# The `Comment` belongs to a `Post.
type Comment @model @key(name: "byPost", fields: ["postID"]) {
  id: ID!
  postID: ID!
  post: Post @connection(fields: ["postID"])
}
```

**Swift code generated by Amplify**

```swift
struct Post: Model {
  let id: String
  let comments: List<Comment>?
}
struct Comment: Model {
  let id: String
  let post: Post?
}
```

**App code**

```swift
Amplify.API.query(request: .get(Post.self, byId: id))
```

- A normal GraphQL selection set could contain multiple levels of data (e.g., the first level being the `Post`, the second level being the list of `Comments`, and so on). However, the plugin detects this and only creates a selection set containing the first "level" of results. This provides a scalable approach to retrieve models with a "not loaded" association, and allows the developer to lazy load the associations later. Without this, a response could potentially have to return the entire object graph in order to maintain referential integrity.

A comparison between the first level of results and the second level of results

**First level of results**
```
query getPost($input: GetPostInput!) {
  getPost(input: $input) {
    id
  }
}
```

> **Second level of results**

Reviewer: Nice!

```json
{
  "id": "[POST_ID]"
}
```
- `GraphQLResponseDecoder ` analyzes the object's model schema. It stores association data (e.g., `post.id` and `"post"` field name) as an `AppSyncModelMetadata` in the instance `JSONValue`'s `"comments"` key.
```json
{
  "id": "[POST_ID]",
  "comments": {
    "appSyncAssociatedId": "[POST_ID]",
    "appSyncAssociatedField": "post"
  }
}
```
- `GraphQLResponseDecoder` serializes object and decodes it to a `Post` instance as described above. The `Post` model-specific decoder instantiates scalar fields normally, while decoding the `comments` field into a `List<Comment>` that delegates its logic to a `AppSyncListDecoder`.
- `AppSyncListDecoder` checks that the data can be successfully decoded to an `AppSyncModelMetadata` and stores this information in an `AppSyncListProvider` when instantiating a "not loaded" list with association data.

The developer now has the `Post` instance and can either explicitly load the comments or lazy load the comments upon accessing iterator methods

**Explicit load** 
```swift
if let comments = post.comments {

>   comments.fetch { fetchResults in

Reviewer: very much a nit, but `fetch` is a Void return type right, where success just indicates that the results are now available in the `List`? If so, let's rename this `fetchResult`, and change the "print" statement below to something like `"fetch completed, list data is now loaded into memory"` or similar.

If in fact the `fetchResults` include data, do something with them in the example to make that clear.

Author: yup this returns void to avoid the customer confusion, will update to `result` since this is a Result type and update print statement
